10 years ago or 15 years ago, very few people realized that they had a battle on their hands.
Largely the groundwork was being laid for a lot of these movements, but now everybody around the
world knows there's a battle, they know what the issues are and people are getting up to speed on
them very quickly. Today I'm joined by Professor Stephen Hicks and very grateful to him for taking
the time to answer some questions in the hope of answering exactly what it is that is happening in
schools and universities and other educational institutions around the world. I think what
happened to me where presenting ideas for debate was deemed to be gross misconduct and a sackable
offense is something that has been taking place a little bit more commonly in the US.
So I'm hoping Professor Hicks can provide some insights about that, but first could you just
tell us a little bit about yourself and how you discovered your passion for philosophy please?
I'm a Canadian by birth, born and raised. I didn't come to the US until starting graduate school.
And philosophy came to be a bit late in life. I was not really serious about becoming a
philosophy professor until well into my 20s. I actually thought I was going to become a
civil engineer and architect and go into the real estate business with my dad. But I always had been
a reader. My parents were both readers and I loved reading kind of all kinds of books,
whatever I came across, whatever was on my parents' shelves. And then a couple things happened when
I started university. I took a course from a very dynamic political science professor,
but he was very much engaged with the great thinkers, John Locke and Friedrich Nietzsche
and Thomas Hobbes and so forth. And this was my first really systematic engagement with these
great minds and sort of things that in my semi-adolescent way I'd thought about, but nothing
systematically. So I was largely blown away by what I was reading and thinking about and the idea
that you can think about those issues in a fundamental way. And realizing that what I was
most interested, even though this was of course in the politics department, was the underlying
philosophical issues about knowledge, about human nature, about how we decide what the good life is
that we are perhaps organizing all of our society in terms of. So that was going on at the same time
independently of reading Locke and Nietzsche. And I was also reading Ein Rand and Ludwig von Mises
and Friedrich Hayek. So it was an awesome first year of university for me. Yeah, it sounds fantastic.
And was there any particular book or idea that really seized you that you can recall?
I think it was, this might sound boring, but more methodological, you know, the idea that you could
think all the way down on these issues. And in a partly in a structured way, saying there's,
if you take this as an assumption, well, you're, you're, you're depending on this, that depends
on this. But at the same time, that is being challenged by this position and this position.
So you need to consider all of them, make up your mind here. And then if you accept this one,
then this follows and that follows. So that was a, you know, I don't want to sound too hippie at
this point, but that was mind blowing expansion, this thing for me at that time. Yeah, I like the
way you frame that as being very much a conversation or dialogue between different voices. And what
was exciting about education is being given an opportunity to join that great conversation across
centuries and new, new vistas sort of opening up that you'd been dimly aware of,
but now you saw the extent of them. Yeah, absolutely. Yes. And to my, my professor's credit,
his name was Fred Vaughn. By the end of this course, I had no idea what his particular
views on any of these, these issues were. So we talked about safe spaces. I had entirely the
sense that I could safely explore any view and voice any opinion and my essays for that course,
try out any ideas that I was, was working through. So that was wonderful. Interesting. I think that
sadly is what many people feel is being increasingly lost in the educational world now.
I know you take the view that ultimately all discussions about what education is and what
its aims are are fundamentally philosophical ones. Could you go into a bit more detail about that?
So why is it that philosophy underlies education? Yeah, well, I know when we are professional
teachers, for example, you know, we have our particular passion, our particular specialization,
and we want the students to come to be more knowledgeable and more skillful and hopefully
passionate about, about our area of expertise. But if you think about any of the expertises
that we want to make a place for in the curriculum, they're always put in the curriculum by reference
to some conception of what the product of education should be or what the goal of education should
be. So if we're going to put mathematics in the curriculum, it's because we say, well,
you're going to need this later in life, or if we're going to put the arts in the curriculum,
it's because we say, well, all your life, there's this great universe of artistic product for you
to explore, enrich your life, or maybe you will yourself become a, so we're always thinking longer
term about what the child will grow up to be as a full adult. But then when we start saying
that conception or thinking about that conception explicitly, what is it to be
a full human adult? And then immediately we have to become very philosophical, right? So
we're saying, you know, what, what capacities needs to be developed? What are our genuine,
mature needs? What things really are worth pursuing? And what things really are not that
important? And how is it all going to fit together so that by the time the child leaves
our educational institution, and we're saying, you know, you were on your own, go out and live
your life, we have some conception of what kind of a life we are we're preparing that for. So,
you know, if you think about all of the great battles we have in education, sometimes it's
a matter of turf war, you know, are we going to put this in the curriculum or not? And oftentimes
that means to make room, we have to take something out in order to put something else in, we have
to make a value judgment about what really is going to serve the student well in the long term.
So, you know, in business courses at the high school level, there's, you know, teaching about
bookkeeping and finance and marketing and management and so on. Well, should we add a
course in entrepreneurship? And there, what we have to do is really make the case that students
need to learn how to be entrepreneurial in their life. And it's a different conception of preparing
students for, say, a business career of just, you know, someone will give you a job and you will
show up and they will tell you what to do. The entrepreneurial way of thinking is a different
philosophical mindset, right? Or, yeah, if we're going to say, should we teach Latin, right, or
Greek on the curriculum? Or should we substitute a modern language? Then what we're going to say is,
well, you know, there's, in many cases, a philosophical difference there. One side
wants to say we are inheritors of this great tradition, and students need to know that great
tradition, absorb it and pass it on to the next generation. Another side wants to say, well,
we're not so sure that those old traditions are all that great, so to speak, but the more
important thing is students live in the real world now. It's a global cosmopolitan world,
and for that they need to multiple languages and so on. So again, we're thinking very
philosophically differently about what kind of life we're preparing students for.
Yeah, the way you've put it there, you can see it ultimately depends on some of the
biggest philosophical questions there are. What is a human being? What is the good life for a human
being? The relationship between the individual and the state? All these things factor into some of
those big educational questions. Exactly right. Yes, that's right. And then some of the people
who've been most impactful on education just in the last century or so, John Dewey, Maria Montessori,
Paulo Freire and so on, all of them have deep philosophical frameworks that they are working
within, and then they're coming along and saying, we need to revolutionize education
based explicitly on that new philosophical framework. So you mentioned some key thinkers
in education there. Which philosophical battles would you say have had the longest lasting or
biggest impact on educational thinking? Yeah, that's a big question because we've been thinking
explicitly about education for millennia. So I'm going to cheat just a little bit and say,
just say in the last 600 years or so as we get into the modern world, and this is a debate that
still is with us in our generation, but I would say it's a twofold debate between some kind of
more religious paternalistic model of education and a more naturalistic and independence
generating model of education. So if we think of now our standard, but the one that's now being
beleaguered, standard model, nonetheless for the last couple of hundred years of liberal education.
So the idea is students need to have a broad base of knowledge. They need to be able to operationalize
that knowledge in terms of skills. It's not just abstract theory. And all of those things are very
complicated. And so students need to be aware of all of the issues and all of the major positions
that are rivals in there. And they need to be able themselves to think and enter into the debate
as participants. And the idea is that there's still a huge amount that we need to learn and
figure out the universe is more open ended. So students need to have a fairly strong mind,
many of them to be active discoverers of new knowledge or active creators of new things.
So that's kind of an idealized understanding of the liberal arts model. And so we are training
free minds. So we're going to free us from ignorance, free us from superstition,
and free us from all of the self doubts that we can actually go forth and make our own lives and
our society's better places. So then that is to say education is precisely about
training students how to do all of that. So we're going to have passionate experts in a lot of
different areas. Those experts will engagingly present all of the major theories, invite students
to learn about them. But at the end of the day, it's going to be that the student has to internalize
it and then find some way to demonstrate his or her best understanding of it. And then the person
is coached and so forth along that direction. Now that has been for the most part to your big
picture question for centuries. Its main contender has been a model that says liberal is not the
right part of education. Instead, education needs to be much more paternalistic and or
on that sliding scale even more authoritarian. And so rather than an active minded students,
students are expected to be more passive. They are receivers of inherited wisdom. And there are
authority figures who have basically figured out or had revealed to them all of the important
answers to life's questions. They are known, they are settled, and it's a top down transition.
And so you don't challenge who are you to challenge as a young person, the great minds of
minds of the past. In some cases overstating this, this is on a sliding scale. But nonetheless,
we have a traditional curriculum that's not going to change over time. And it's going to be
delivered in a hopefully benevolent paternalistic fashion. But then depending on how pessimistic
you are about students aptitude for learning, you might need to use some more authoritarian methods.
So that has been the great battle in the modern world. And in historians label, that's
sort of modern liberal education versus pre-modern or hardcore traditionalist pre-modern education.
And do you think that that is fundamentally the most important battle over education today?
Or do you think that it has shifted slightly? Some of what you described there
sounded as if we might be seeing a return to a more authoritarian model of education,
but a very different perspective. No longer a authority rooted in religious education traditions,
but that's very much secular, but has the same fundamental vantage point. So I expect you to
come into class and hear some things which ultimately I want you to believe because they are
correct and they shouldn't be challenged. Yes, no, absolutely. That's right. On my reading of
the big ideas, it's almost always a three-way debate on all of the fundamentals. So yes, to say
either we're going to be more supernaturalist and religious in our understanding of the way
the world works, or we're going to be more secular and naturalistic, that's two positions. And they
are those are huge ones, but there's a third position that is a skeptical position that says
the nature of reality. We don't know what that is. It's impossible to know. There is no such thing as
an objective God and a supernatural reality or an objective natural reality. Instead,
everything is some sort of subjective creation and ultimately I or we make up our own reality.
So that's a three-way debate. Just on the cognition issues that become very fundamental to
education, one side traditionally has wanted to say there is such a thing as truth. Typically,
it's truth with a capital T. It's in a higher dimension. And what we need to do is find some way
of accessing that higher dimension. Sometimes it will reveal itself to us through revelation
or some special individuals will have a mystical insight and or people who don't get those mystical
insights or revelations, they will need to have faith. And so there's been one traditional on the
model of knowledge that then gets applied in education circles that says it's a matter of
revelation, training people for mystical insight and or expecting them to have faith. And so then
you will base your model of education on that. In contrast to that, there's another position that
says no, no, objective knowledge is possible, but knowledge is of reality and reality is the
natural world, which is cause and effect. So we need to train our senses to observe it very
carefully and then to use our reason to categorize things and try out hypotheses and then develop all
the formal tools of scientific method. So we can get objective knowledge of reality, but by
not by faith and revelation, but rather by doing kind of hard, empirical and rational work.
Now, the third position though, comes along and says, well, look, both of you guys are saying
that there's a reality out there that can be known and that there are ultimately truths,
but we're skeptical. We don't think there is any such thing as knowledge. We think mystical
insight, that's just a matter of wishful thinking, right? Faith is just dogmatic, following the leader
and not thinking for yourself. But at the same time, we think the senses are illusory. We think
logic is just made up word games, right? Math has no connection to actual reality. And so nobody
really knows anything. We all just have various sorts of subjective preferences that have been
instilled in us. And so we're skeptical, we're relativistic and so on. So again, we have a
three-way debate. So to come back to the first part of that, it is that third position. Philosophically,
we have been at a very skeptical place for the last century or so. The collapse of positivism,
the rise of existentialism, and any number of other movements that have become household names,
all of them are very skeptical at their core. And as a result of that, they doubt that there is such
a thing as truth, such a thing as knowledge, facts, and that we're in some sense trapped in a kind of
subjectivity. Now, that then could go in a couple of directions. One then is to say, well, you know,
if nobody really knows anything, then we should all just be very tolerant and let everybody do their
own thing and believe whatever, because nobody is in a position to say that I'm better and you're
worse on whatever the issue is. But the way it more often comes out is that it's very hard for
people to live that way, saying I don't know anything, nobody knows anything, and we're all just
going to go off and do our own things, because people want their lives to be meaningful. And
typically they want to be committed to something. And typically they have a social value framework
and in many cases a political framework that they want everybody to live in terms of. So what they
will then typically do is adopt what you're referring to as a new kind of authoritarianism.
If it is the case that nobody knows anything, there's no such thing as a true reality out
there. It's all just subjective value beliefs and the things that have been conditioned into us.
Well, I might as well just plunge into the fray, right? I might as well just say,
here's what I happen to believe. This is what seems significant and meaningful to me,
and I'm not going to claim that it's true or that it's objective. And I very well recognize
that there are lots of other frameworks out there, but really we're just a bunch of people
with our own subjective frameworks in competition with each other to see who's going to prevail.
And I just want my viewpoint to prevail. And so I'm going to use any techniques, including
authoritarian techniques, if it's going to enable my view to prevail. So you can get an
authoritarianism out of that kind of skepticism as well. You mentioned Nietzsche as one of the
thinkers who was influential for you as a young man just starting formal education and experiencing
your passion for philosophy for the first time. And the idea that there are no facts,
only interpretations is one which some historians of philosophy trace to Nietzsche. Much of what
you're describing there sounds like it's influenced by that idea. And Nietzsche has been called the
kind of grandfather of postmodernism. If we're left with just the interpretations and it's just
power narratives, is what you're suggesting that people just want to claim power for their own narrative?
Yeah, absolutely. Yes. And you're right to cite Nietzsche. I'm not a Nietzschean. I learned a
lot from Nietzsche, but I think he is the most influential philosopher for the last century
or so. And in some ways the dates are perfect because he died in 1900 and basically the 20th
century intellectually was largely a Nietzschean century. So the philosophers whom the current
social justice warriors, the wokists, the advocates of political correct authoritarianism and so on.
So they are the children or the grandchildren. They will go back and be citing figures like
Michel Foucault. They might not have read him at this point, but Foucault cites Nietzsche as a
formative influence. Or it might be Heidegger, another giant of 20th century philosophy. Martin
Heidegger is largely influenced by Nietzsche as well. So that grandfather, father,
grandchild narrative that works as well. So Nietzsche is a very fundamentally subjectivist
philosopher with respect to knowledge. He's standing at the end of a long tradition of
skeptical philosophy and he comes to believe on all of the major issues about perception,
about our forming of abstractions, about our memories, about our ability to do grammar and
linguistics and to form scientific theories and narrations and so on. All of that is driven by
skeptical arguments that have hollowed out any positive account of those. So we're just left
with subjectivism. And then there's a kind of relativism that comes out of that. So then
Nietzsche, though, is also first generation thinkers to grapple seriously with evolutionary
ideas. And partly this means that you don't see reality as fixed for all time in terms of one
stable framework, that reality itself, including humans as organisms are evolving. And so what's,
you know, good for this organism at this time is going to be different from what's good for
that kind of organism later. And so you have the idea that the rules of the game are evolving
over time instead of fixed absolute truths as well. But you also get this idea that, well, look,
if there's no such thing as truth, there's no such thing as your rationality is figuring out
objectively what the facts of the situation are. If it's all subjective, and this evolving
struggle and rivalry, then you do start to start using language like power a different way. So then
it is just a power struggle between the strong and the weak. And the strong have their narrative and
their subjective preferences and the weak have theirs. And it's not going to be decided by truth
and decency and universal rights, because we don't believe in those anymore. It's just going to be
a naked power struggle. So there a very adversarial understanding of power comes out of that. And
Nietzsche is one of the most clear sighted on that issue. And then the 20th century is largely,
largely inheriting that. Now, by contrast to that, and this is going to be closer to my own
views. So power is an important word. But so what do we mean by power? And there's a much more
optimistic benevolent understanding of power that is that is that is possible. Power is the
capacity to get stuff done. You're more powerful to the extent that you have the knowledge and the
skills and other kinds of resources to be able to accomplish stuff in the world. And so knowledge
comes in a lot of different forms of intellectual power. So here we think about Francis Bacon,
knowledge is power. And this then ties us back to education. So here we think about power as a good
thing. We want to empower our students to build up their cognitive power and their physical power
and their character power so that they can go forth and do good things in the world. And if you
cooble that with a more benevolent understanding of human beings, that human beings are competent
at acquiring knowledge, they are competent at working out socially and mutually beneficial
ways of living together as friends, as romantic partners, starting family, starting businesses,
even doing politics. Politics, of course, is about power, but we're going to do it in a democratic
and republican way that respects every individual's own power and their own agency, right, and so
forth. So here we have the idea that power is very important and we want more and more power.
But we think that that power, of course, it can be abused, but human beings can work out ways of
using power benevolently. So that understanding of power, though, has philosophical opposition to
those who say, no, human beings are much more irrational, much more impotent with respect to
cognitive matters, much more subjective and animalistic with respect to the formation of their
values. And so power becomes a much darker thing. So that battle over power is also part of what we
are engaged in right now. I think that's certainly the case and what people often first think of
when they think of power is hierarchy and therefore things no longer being equal. And I think this
idea of power and different power centers struggling to get the most power for themselves
is interpreted by many people as relating to the Marxist concept of oppression and struggle between
different classes. And do you think that the division of the world that Nietzsche puts forward
as struggling power centers is deeply related to Marxist concept of struggle, or have the two
become intertwined in the way that some thinkers have related the two of them? I think they are
variations on a fundamental theme. Both of them do have this idea of power completely dissociated
from truth, knowledge, and values. So it's not the idea that we can figure out what the truth is
and that we can figure out what's good in the world and then respect that all individuals have
the capacity for learning the truth and that all individuals have certain core value statuses that
we call that we call rights. So what we then will think is that we want those kinds of people to
have power, but it's in the service of discovering more truth and advancing their rights and advancing
genuine good in the world. If you reverse that, if you then say, no, really in the first place,
it's just power and all of these so-called truths and all these so-called values are just subjective
and variable across human beings, then what you're going to find is your truth is in the service of
power rather than power in the service of actual truth and so that fundamental reversal is there.
Now, to get to Marx and Nietzsche, what both of them do is start off with a very skeptical,
subjectivist understanding of the world and an adversarial understanding of human beings. So
for them, the difference between strong and weak centers of power, that is the fundamental
and on the basis of that, it really just is a question of where your sympathies are. So for Marx,
he's going to divide them into bourgeoisie and proletariat or those who own property and those
who economically sell their labor to those who have property. So you have these two different
classes and then you make them adversarial to each other. And so on the basis of that,
it's just a matter of are these guys power going to prevail in this rivalry or are these guys power
going to prevail in the rivalry? And in the case of Marx, his sympathies are just with the weaker
currently in the power struggle. But Nietzsche is going to give a very similar analysis. He's going
to say, not economically but rather biologically and psychobiologically, there are different centers
of power. Some of us are more predator-like, some of us are more prey-like, some of us are stronger,
some of us are weaker. And we are in adversarial relations to each other. But in the case of
Nietzsche, it's just that his sympathies are with the stronger, the more predatory light. So he's
going to say, no, these people over here are kind of pathetic. They're not the ones that are going
to advance the human species. So I'm going to go for them. So the Marxists are in favor of the weak
against the strong. The Nietzscheans are in favor of the strong against the weak. But both of them
are agreeing fundamentally that it's an adversarial you versus me power struggle. And there are no
such things as universal rights, universal goodness or objective truths. I think there's a lot of depth
to that. And one thought that I had about it is that if the Marxist sympathies are with the weak,
would it also be true to say that in order to equalize things, they themselves need to
be in a position of power? Yes, for sure. It's going to be the more Nietzschean position that says
the inequalities are natural, perhaps biologically driven. It's going to be the Marxist position
that all inequalities are artificial and driven primarily by social circumstances and so on.
But then yes, so the Nietzscheans then are going to say, you know, we have no problem with dramatic
inequalities across every single dimension, because it's going to be the high fliers. They're
the ones who are going to advance the human species. Whereas the Marxists want to level
everything on the ground, it's going to be through some sort of collectivity of equal human beings
that we're going to advance the human species. So yes, for both of them, the most fundamental debate
is this social power equality dimension. And so that makes them both going much more, I think,
in the postmodern direction. By contrast, the position I'm much more sympathetic than neither
Marxist nor nor Nietzschean is that equality is an important concept, but it's an equality
at a slightly abstract level. We are all equally human beings in the sense that we have our own
lives, we have our own cognitive capacities. And the important thing is that each of us is free
to develop our own capacities to our fullest extent. And that socially we need to be left
free in order to be able to do so. Right. That makes a lot of sense. And you can see the
temptation from a Marxist line of thinking, if everything is due to social inequality, and it's
socially constructed, then presumably it can all be reconstructed into a much more
amenable version of the world. I think that's a possibility, whereas the Nietzschean perspective
would be no, some of these things are built in. Yeah, absolutely. So another very fundamental
issue, and we've touched briefly on it, but I think it's worth stressing at this point is
who is going to be doing this restructuring. So we all say there's problems in the world,
and you might be more pessimistic or more optimistic. So there's problems in the world,
and we want to fix those problems. Well, then the question is, who is going to do the fixing?
And what you do get out of Marxism is the idea that it has to be some sort of powerful group,
the vanguard of the proletariat, who takes it and uses basically all of society's resources in
order to change it. And the Nietzscheans are also going to argue that whatever improvements
they're going to come from certain special individuals, and both of them are contrasted to
the position that says it's the individual, all of us, who have agency in our own lives.
And if you want to change your circumstance, all fundamentally it is up to you to develop your
individual capacities in order to change the world in the way you want to go. And what's very important
here is how both the Nietzscheans and the Marxists, the Marxists even more so. And then there are
second, third generation inheritors now who deny individual agency fundamentally. They will say,
this is the birth of victimhood culture. So the victim is the person who is the ultimate
lack of agency. I am who I am because I've been pushed around by all of these social forces beyond
my control. I have no agency. And anything that's nasty in my life is somebody else's fault. And
anytime we say, well, maybe you could do something about it. Or maybe you are in part to blame for
your circumstance right now. That is just swept off the table. You're blaming the victim or you're
doing some other kind of sin from that particular lexicon. So this issue really does come down to
that old, again, philosophical debate about volition or free will versus some sort of determinism.
And another important part of this is that the Marxists and the cultural Marxists and the Neo
postmodernists and so on, all of them do advocate very strongly forms of determinism.
That says that really the human being is just a lump of plasticine born into a world shaped by
social forces and other environmental forces beyond his control. And all you can really do if
you have any measure of agency is just decide to accept where you are and then commit yourself in a
non-rational way to advancing that set of interests. But of course, everybody else is doing the same
thing. It does become a power struggle. Now, that deterministic view of human beings, does that
shed any light on why we most often tend to see the the proclivity to cancel debate
among postmodernist perspectives. So rather than answering speech with more speech and
emphasizing the importance of debate, instead, what we get is no, you're not allowed to hear that
perspective or that view is somehow beyond the law. Yes. Why aren't people trusted to listen and
make up their own minds? Yes. No, that's a great, great question. And it goes to the heart of what
liberal education should be. So the last part of your phrase that we're going to trust individuals
to make up their own minds. So make up your own mind. That's an agency point. Yeah. So part of the
answer is going to be we don't think individuals have agency or the middle part of it. Individuals,
the postmoderns, and they don't believe in individuals. You are a social construct. You
are fundamentally a part of a group that has shaped you. So the identity politics, it's actually the
identity part that's the most important there. It's not really primarily about politics. It's
about what is your identity. And what we find is that they are arguing is that your identity is
not as an individual, or most the individual just is the thing of all of the Venn diagram
constructions. You're the overlap of a whole bunch of group identities. So you are a
collectivized individual. So you're a collective being that is shaped by forces rather than
individuals who are going to make up their own minds. But then also if you think about debate
as a formal educational device, the assumptions of debate are that here's a controversy,
and we're going to acknowledge that this is a controversy, that there are at least two positions
and that they're both important positions. And probably most of us don't know what position
we should accept yet. So we're going to go through a certain formal process to get there.
And we are going to respect advocates of both positions that are going to be there.
And that we are interested in the truth, or at least the best approximation of the truth that
we can get right now. So we still believe in truth. We believe in respect. We believe that there are
genuine controversies. And we think that the way we should proceed is by using a formal reason.
You put a position out there, you develop an argument for it. The other person then critiques
that argument saying, you know, your factual basis is incorrect here, or you've made an error
of logic there. So we're talking about facts and logic and argumentation. And the world is complex
and we're going to be rational. And then of course, in a debate, again, we're back to where you ended
in your formulation, we're going to leave it up to each member of the audience to make up his or
her own mind after hopefully having carefully considered. So that whole apparatus is necessary
if you're going to think that debate is a useful and important pedagogical device. But then what
we find is that by the time you get to strong skepticism, strong kind of adversarial, cynical
power understandings of the world, strong collective collectivity, and lack of agency,
everything goes out the window. We're not rational. Logic is a myth. There are no facts.
Respect for each other. You got to be kidding me. It's all just an uncivil power struggle.
And so what you then do is that whatever institution you are, is you don't listen
respectfully and engage the debate. Instead, you act as a member of the adversarial power struggle.
You try to shut down the debate by using intimidation tactics or just physical shouting over the
person or using threats and so on. So you're fundamentally opposed to everything that goes
into making debate possible. And so that's why cancel culture is on the rise.
I think that gets right to the heart of the matter. And it's, it's sad to hear it put succinctly
like that because fundamentally what's under attack is the commitment to rationality itself.
Exactly. That primary component of education. So there's just no value in debate because
traditionally the value of free speech and debate has been both parties are somehow interested in
working together collaboratively to struggle towards the truth together. And if that is taken
away, then there's no point in it. That's right. There's no truth. There's no collaboration, right?
We are in a different philosophical universe altogether. There's a really chilling line
in Victor Clemperer's book on the language of the Third Reich. I'll just read this so I get it right.
He said that words are like tiny doses of arsenic swallowed unnoticed
and then after a while the toxic reaction sets in. I'm wondering whether we're starting to
experience a toxic reaction to some words that have been in the political educational culture
for some time now, but it's only now that the impact is really being felt. Do you have any thoughts
on that? No, absolutely right. That weaponization of language is a very useful phrase and
accurately descriptive of what's going on. And it's part of a self-conscious strategy. So if we
think of concepts like racist and sexist and privilege and the structural part of structural
whatever pathology we're interested, those can all be legitimate concepts, but they are all
concepts that at least in my language are used as anti-concepts. That's partly a technical
term of art, so let me say a little bit about that. But an anti-concept is meant to be a word
or a phrase that's used to dismantle language and undercut communication and nonetheless
in an adversarial concept or context rather to put your adversary in a defensive position.
And so the weaponization part is absolutely right there. So here again we have to get deep.
So what's the purpose of language? What is language about? And partly the standard modern
view has been that language is a tool of cognition. We have a big brain, we can form abstractions
and concepts and then start developing complex propositions and putting them together in narratives
and theories and so on. But ultimately we use language as rational animals to figure out and
carry around a map or a representation or a set of theories of the world in our heads. So
fundamentally language is a tool of cognition. But of course a lot of that we do socially,
so we want to connect with each other and so language is also a tool of communication.
But if we're going to communicate then we have to make sure that you're using words in the same
way that I'm using words and so definition and concept formation and all of that exercise that
we go through sometimes frustrating to make sure we're on the same page. That's very important
because we are interested in communication as a form of collaboration. Now of course sometimes
we are in an adversarial situations and so we're also going to use language as rhetorical weapons
in that particular. But that's hopefully a last resort and that's really a sign that something
has gone terribly wrong because fundamentally language should be about helping us understand
the world and communicate with each other. So the weaponization of language though as a prevailing
tactic as your first course, you start off with an insult, you start off with an accusation,
you start trying to get inside the person's head to put them on the defensive that is coming out of
an ideological strategy that says no we don't cognize the world and life is not about social
communication. It is a dog eat dog war and language is just one tool in that war but the kind of tool
you need in that war is weapons and so you become very good at using language as a weapon in whatever
social where you're going. So racism for example that's a very important concept in the modern
world and we all need to think about what it means or what are the psychological and the social
underpinnings of it to what extent are the person's intent and their knowledge and their
commitments and their values and so forth are organized and the same thing for sexism and so
on. So all of these concepts do need careful understanding and careful definition and at
the same time we should recognize that particularly now that we are well into the modern world we're
believers in rights and human dignity and human freedom and equality under the law that racism
is a pathology but we've made great progress on that and so yes there are racists out there but
we really should use that word in a very targeted way and before we accuse someone of being a racist
we better have done our homework and make sure that we're using this highly important concept
accurately but what we of course find right now is that that's not at all what's going on right the
word racism is very promiscuously applied and people have not done their homework they're
just throwing it out there they've never met you they don't know anything about you in particular
but that's what they that's what they lead with and in many cases you know people who are leading
seminars in business they will go in and you know just throw out very gross generalities about the
racial attitudes of entire groups of people and take it for granted and so on so that is very
clearly a weaponization of language but racism then is being used to put people on the defensive
right because you know they know very well for example if you accuse someone of being a racist
in the early 21st century right the person's reaction is going to be you know immediately
defensive what me i'm not a racist and then they start doing some self-examination here
but then you immediately put that person on the defensive and disoriented that person and then
that puts you in an advantageous position for how the how the argument is going to go or how the
proceedings are are going to go so you know each of these has a story but how racism sexism privilege
and structural in structural racism are used right now there is a a worked out academic literature
over the last now two generations and so these do come to be terms of art and it is part of a
strategy about how to use these words to advance certain rhetorical goals and those are in the
context of a certain kind of broader ideological goal as well so i don't know if we want to drill
down into those more specifically you know maybe structural racism would be a good one to examine
or the concept of privilege but i will follow your lead on that well the way you explained how it
puts people on the back foot puts them on the defensive hmm i'm wondering whether some of the
the key words that many people have noticed in contemporary culture words like diversity for
example or inclusion or equity some of those just sound attractive and it seems like they can work
like a trojan horse so they're a way of sneaking in almost by stealth some prior or fundamental
assumed concepts that not everyone has really thought about deeply and yet those words get them
in and that's a new vantage point to attack from do you think that's exactly right exactly right
for sure in some cases these are you know technical terms of art and there's a whole package of
associated beliefs and assumptions that are that are built into it and the the people who are
coining these terms that's what academics do in their areas of expertise they always are choosing
words carefully you know because and part of it is if you're trained in rhetoric you know
you sometimes can't nakedly state what your position is about you have to come up with an
attractive label and at the same time you know that many of the labels that are out there and are
popular or have cachet in the culture are coming from a different philosophical tradition and
you want to get those ones taken off the table so to speak and one way of doing that is by
hollowing them out and one way that typically happens is you know here's here's a word that's
now has a current understanding and then you will just add an adjective to that and then that adjective
brings with it a certain number of assumptions and it sounds like you're just engaging in the debate
but over time the adjectives assumptions comes to dominate and this part gets hollowed out so I
think structural racism is a very good example of that or the concept of privilege as it is used now
the concept of diversity which has a genuine meaning equity is a another new kid on the block
those are all very good examples of exactly that strategy and we find strangely as well that
these words end up in practice meaning almost the opposite of the kind of untutored reading of
them so diversity ends up being no we don't do diversity of thought it's very much a monoculture
that's right that's right so the standard liberal arts ideal embraces diversity because it
understands from the get-go that individuals are individuals you know partly it's that we
are different in many respects as individuals so we have to be respectful of individual diversity
but also the world is very complicated and there's a lot of things we don't know yet
so built into the liberal education model is that people are going to come up with
diverse interpretations of the world as they are working them out and so we need to respect
and in some cases tolerate a lot of diversity of individuality and a lot of diversity of opinion
and so that is a beautiful concept and that is the established concept but then if you come along
and you have a very different philosophical agenda that is one of the concepts that you need to
hollow out and replace with a different understanding of diversity and that's what has been happening
over the last two centuries the two generations yeah I'm wondering whether based on what
some concerned teachers have been expressing to me privately have we seen a hollowing out of the
term education itself some people are starting to feel like there are institutions increasingly
which on the face of it aim at education but really are aiming at some form of indoctrination
yes no that that's exactly right so we're having a huge philosophical ideological battle over
over what education should be and to a large extent it's also a politicized battle
not only because government funding of education is a significant part of the story in the modern
world so yeah so we do as teachers and as parents and I would say parents are going to become
increasingly important in this generation because you know for a century or so we have as parents
been able to assume that education is a certain thing and that there are people who are experts
in that they are benevolent and we can you know turn our kids over to them and give them
hundreds of thousands of pounds to to do something significant with my my children and now parents
I think are are properly realizing no I need to do some rethinking about about what's going on here
so what what is education and I think the the word you use indoctrination is the right word to
contrast it to so indoctrination used to have a bad label because the idea there is there is a
doctrine a doctrine and it is set it is known and the people in charge of of education they know
what it is and as the word means literally you take the doctrine and you put it in the students
and the students are conceived of as being more passive they they absorb it they don't question
it and then they regurgitate it in the approved kinds of forms now that model of education of
course it's it's ancient but it does seem that it's coming back in a new form in in our in our
current generation it's for all of the reasons that that we've we've been talking about you know
is there such a thing as a doctrine that I believe and I'm committed to no matter what
an important thing for me as a teacher is that this gets into the students heads and I will use
any tactics or any techniques to make sure that that one doctrine gets in their heads to the extent
that you go down that road and all of us in the privacy of our own minds as as teachers we make
this strategic choice but I think to the extent that any individual teacher goes down that road
they are profoundly irresponsible they should not go into education and I think to the extent
that those of us who are fellow teachers parents in any sort of position of power on school boards
and so forth have as part of our moral responsibility not to let indoctrinators become teachers in the
first place of course there's a trial period if we're going to give them tenure at some point
not give them them tenure it's a total ultimate sabotage of of education I think what you've
described there about the threats of growing indoctrination in education rings true for many
people working in schools and universities seeing this happening around them but they aren't sure
what to do about it what would your advice be for people wanting to resist it it's a very
difficult question because people don't want to end up in my position for example sacked over
what many people regard as a free speech issue even though there might be many people
want to speak out they're not sure what an effective way to do it is
Yeah well I would say the first thing is be confident in yourself realize that you are a good person
you are a reasonable person and I think anybody who is committed to being a parent anybody
in our generation as a young person has decided they want to become a teacher I think the default
position in in vast majority of cases is because you are a good person you know what it is to be
a racist maybe not you know you don't have all of the history and all of the psychology what
sexism is what what unfairness is so trust your own judgment on all of those issues and of course
we're lifelong learners all of those cliches and so on but don't let anybody who wants to sabotage
your sense of your moral worth and your competence as a rational adult have any space in your in
your psyche at all when you recognize that you're dealing with a person like that recognize
a need or if something smells wrong here and that the problem is with the other person and then
of course be benevolent be civil to the extent that you think you're dealing with this kind of
person but don't let them get under your skin I think that's the the most important thing I think
the second thing is to recognize and realize that you are more powerful than you think
as soon as your peers and your students your peers as teachers your peers in the broader
education community yeah we're all very good at sizing each other up are you a decent person are
you a smart person are you passionate about your your field are you a fair-minded person and so on
your reputation will give you more power than you think even in the case where this this should
happen in education that we have disagreements about all kinds of important things political
religious social right and so forth that as long as people know that you are a decent smart well
meaning person they will cut you a lot of slack and even if they're one of the quieter ones who's
not or are not as much interested in speaking up and so forth to the extent that you speak up
you are you're putting forth reasonable positions you're listening to the opposition you're responding
and so forth you will have more influence than you think you might otherwise you might otherwise
have so that's partly a point about self-confidence but it's also of course a point about courage
and we all know that we want to particularly if we are decent people we want to get along
with people we want to to build the win-win relationships and so it is a little bit unsettling
to be attacked and to realize that at some point we do have to stand up on principle and fight for
our values so the virtue of courage that the philosophers at least all the good philosophers
have returned to generation after generation is an important one important one to attend to
that's necessarily mean to go on you know martyr yourself right right off the bat you have to choose
your battles carefully but ultimately we all do need to work on our courage as well and to be
willing to fight for our important values particularly in our profession's educational
values all of our careers it's it's part of the job yeah I think that's absolutely key and
sometimes courage or fortitude is more important than prudence and it's the the primary virtue
for that reason I think people underestimate what impact one person displaying it can have
there's a knock on effect it's a little bit like if you look at the nature documentaries if the whole
herd turns on a predator all at once then that's it the the wolf won't chase the bison but if they
all flee suddenly the wolf is emboldened so you need people to stand together and sometimes it takes
one or two to be able to get a turn of face and I don't think appeasement exactly right compromise
it's likely to work in many cases because of the nature of the ideology you're dealing with
we're all familiar with the example of a tank man in Tiananmen Square exactly the the arresting
image of uh uh I think it was Boris Yeltsin in uh Redscary jumping on top of the the tank you
know both involving tanks but that one individual willing to stand up and they I'm drawing a line
here that does embolden huge numbers of other people in this and is very inspiring some of
what we've been saying so far is broadly pessimistic in that we've been looking at problems do you
think that there might be some causes for hope on the horizon some solutions oh yeah absolutely yes
we've been uh diagnosing diagnosing some very negative friends uh for for much of this this
discussion here but I am ultimately optimistic about this I do think it's going to be ugly
and to some extent brutal for the next five years to 10 years I'm not going to do too much
crystal ball gazing because we're in the midst of the the battle right now but what I'm optimistic
about is uh is several things one is uh 10 years ago or 15 years ago very few people realized
that they had a battle on their hands largely the the groundwork was being laid for a lot of
these movements but now everybody around the world knows there's a battle they know what the issues
are and people are getting up to speed on them on them very quickly and to uh to a large extent
you know it's true about sunlight being the best disinfectant to a large extent these pathological
movements have been able to do their work in the dark without people realizing but now that we are
aware shining the light on them they are a lot of them in defensive mode they have fairly radical
ambitions but now they're backpedaling and say oh no no we're saying is this that and the other thing
and that's a a sign that's a good sign I do think technologically there's a lot to be optimistic
about uh I'm a great believer in the power of the internet of course there's a huge amount of
crap out there but young people especially who are much more uh have much more facility right
with these devices and to the extent that they recognize they are getting crap in their formal
schooling uh there's still young people and they go off and they've got a huge amount of awesome
wonderful beautiful stuff at low cost available to them and the more intellectually curious of
them are going to go off and do so and then of course uh the all of the new technologies
really are bringing the cost of education down enormously that's it's amazing the the reduction
in the cost of of educational materials and educational delivery systems and they're also
enabling uh all sorts of people who have some entrepreneurial ambitions but are thinking in
education to do all sorts of experimenting with alternative uh mod models of education and so
on so uh the fact that things have gone downhill so badly and so much of the formal education
system is spawning a kind of entrepreneurial revolution early stages but I'm I'm optimistic
about that the main thing though I'm optimistic about though is uh uh it's more philosophical you
human beings are are human beings and uh particularly young people when I think it is
natural for young people to be energetic and ambitious and wants to do something significant
and meaningful with their with their lives I think that's built into to human conditions and I think
it takes a lot to sabotage that uh uh and and to undercut it and I think a lot of times uh human
beings young human beings they've already got good resources psychologically and physically and
and hopefully a social support network when they are experiencing the negativity they know how to
shut it out they know how to develop their own resources and look elsewhere for for healthy
healthy developments and I do you know you're speaking from a British context I'm from a
North American context you know here we live in extraordinarily rich societies with so many
opportunities out there so many resources available to us but I think the the next generation of
younger people come up they will be affected by the negative trends but that's that's sad but at
the same time they do need to learn about them and be aware of them but they will become better
armed and they will have the energy and the resources available to go off and do awesome stuff so
ultimately I'm I'm I'm excited about the future yeah I think lots of people share that excitement
and it it might not be going too far to say that the internet could have perhaps an even
greater impact on education than the invention of the printing press did I hope we see something
coming from that I think your your excitement about the internet's potential is definitely well
placed great yeah good good and thanks for giving such detailed answers to the questions I think
taken together those will provide many people with some important clarity about these topics
that concern so many where can people find out more about you and your work well I do have a
personal slash professional website it's just stevenhicks.org and then you know my commentaries
on various things short and long and then my publications and so on typically end up there
at some point so I would recommend that as as a starting point but let me also say to you thank
you for for being an example of integrity your name is now right known around the world for
for your your commitment to education and not being willing to back down so I'm glad to know
you and thank you for inviting me onto your show it's been a pleasure and you're welcome I've got
no regrets because as I said in an interview I felt that the career had vanished before my eyes
while I was doing it and for me it's fundamentally about integrity and what kind of institutions
we leave to future generations yeah well said thank you very much it's been a pleasure to speak with
you all right for me too thanks